---
layout: post
category: lab
title: Lab 05 - The ATM
date: 2013-02-26
---
# Lab 05 - The ATM

## Assignment

Your assignment is to implement a mini-ATM. When you run the program, the user should see the 
following menu:

    > Enter an option:
    > (W)ithdraw
    > (D)eposit
    > (B)alance Inquiry
    > (Q)uit

- The bank account should have some default balance to start with.
- The program should run over and over again until the user inputs 'q'.
- Both uppercase and lowercase input should be accepted.
- All numbers should be shown with exactly 2 decimal places.
- You can assume that all user input has no more than 2 decimal places.

## Methods

Your program should have at least the following methods:

1. displayMenu()
2. withdraw()
3. deposit()
4. balance()

### displayMenu()

This method should display the menu shown above and call the other methods depending on user input.

All `Console.WriteLine()` and `Console.ReadLine()` statements should be in this method. Think of it 
as the user interface.

Any time the user's balance is updated (by deposit() or withdrawal()) this method should print the 
new balance.

#### Error Handling

The program should handle if a user inputs something other than a valid option and prompt them to 
try again.

### withdraw()

This method should subtract a withdrawal amount from the user's balance.

#### Error Handling

Your program should handle the case where the user inputs a withdrawal amount larger than the account 
balance and return an error, prompting the user to try again.

Your program should also handle the case where the user inputs a negative withdrawal amount.

## deposit()

This method should add a deposit amount to the user's balance.

### Error Handling

Your program should handle the case where the user inputs negative deposit amount and return an 
error, prompting the user to try again.

## balance()

This method should return the current account balance.
