---
layout: post
category: lab
title: Lab 08 - Magic Squares
date: 2013-03-10
---
# Lab 08 - Magic Squares

## Background

Considering the following 4 x 4 square:

01  14  14  04  
11  07  06  09  
08  10  10  05  
13  02  03  15  

The sum of every row, column and diagonal of this square is equal to the same number (check for 
yourself). This is what we call a magic square.  

## Assignment

Your assignment is to write a program that reads in a file and determines whether it is a magic 
square or not. If it is, it should also determine what the 'magic number' is (it's 33 for the above
square).

## Specifications & Assumptions

Your input will be a text file with one number per line. You can assume that the number of lines is 
always a perfect square (4, 9, 16, 25, etc.). For example, a 3 x 3 magic square would look like this: 

4  
9  
2  
3  
5  
7  
8  
1  
6  

Since the input is 9 lines long, you would determine that it is a 3 x 3 square and create an 
appropriated 2D array. Then you would read in one line at a time into the array.

- After reading in the file, you should print the square to screen.
- You will need several methods for this program, one to read in a file, another to print the 
square, another to determine the sum of a row, of a column, diagonal, and then a method to determine 
whether a square is a magic square.
- You should output whether a square is magic or not and if so what its magic number is.

## Helpful Info

In order to determine how many lines an input file has, use this method:

    File.ReadLines("<filename>").Count()

The size of your array should be n x n where n is the square-root of the number of lines in the file.

You will be using nested for loops to iterate over rows and columns.



