---
layout: post
category: lab
title: Lab 09 - Exception Handling
date: 2013-04-09
---
# Lab 09 - Exception Handling

We're going to practice exception handling by fixing this very broken program I will give you.

## Program File

First, copy/paste the code from the linked .cs file into your Program.cs file for your Lab 9 
project.

[lab9.cs][1]

## Assignment

We're going to go through and modify the code so that it runs and handle errors gracefully.

1. Without making any changes. Run the program. What happens? 
2. Modify the program so that it handle the exception in 1 and re-run it.
3. Create an `input.txt` file in your root directory `C:\`. Add 6 numbers (decimals or integers) to 
it, each on a separate line. Now try running the program again. What happens?
4. Modify the program so it handles the exception in 3 and re-run it.
5. Increase your MAX_SIZE constant to 7 and then add the word 'bacon' to input.txt on one of the 
lines. Re-run your program. What happens?
6. Modify the code so it handles the exception in 5 and re-run it.

Because you're dealing with outside files that will need to be modified (input.txt), it's okay for 
the program to exit anytime it encounters an exception. Use `Environment.Exit(1)` to accomplish 
that.

Unrelated to exception handling, but can you modify the program so that the size of the data[] array 
is dynamically set according to the number of lines in 'input.txt'? (Hint: Lab 8 tells you a useful 
function to accomplish this.)

[1]: /labs/files/lab9.cs "Lab 9 Code" 
