---
layout: post
category: lab
title: Lab 07 - Palindromes
date: 2013-03-10
---
# Lab 07 - Palindromes

## Background

A palindrome is a string that reads the same both backwards and forwards. A few examples:

- level
- noon
- redder

## Assignment

Your assignment is to request the user's input and then output whether the user's input was a 
palindrome or not. Here is a sample interaction:

    > Please enter a word or 'quit' to quit:
    > robot
    >
    > Your input is not a palindrome.
    >
    > Please enter a word:
    > civic
    >
    > Your input is a palindrome.
    >
    > Please enter a word:
    > quit
    >
    > Goodbye!

## Specifications and Assumptions

- Your program must repeat until the user enters 'quit'.
- You should be properly using methods rather than putting all of your code into your Main() 
method. For example, you might have a `readInput()` method to request the user's input and an 
`isPalindrome()` method to verify whether a string is a palindrome.
- You can assume that the user inputs only letters and numbers with no spaces (so '1331' would be 
a valid input and should count as a palindrome).

## Helpful Information

Given that this lab is in the Arrays lesson, it stands to reason that you'll be using arrays to 
solve this problem. In fact, what you'll be doing is converting the user's input string into a 
character array and then examining the array to determine whether it is a palindrome or not. In 
order to convert a string into an array, you use the `ToCharArray()` method. An example:

    string str = "bacon"
    char[] arr;

    arr = str.ToCharArray(0, str.Length);

The first argument of `ToCharArray` is the index of the string at which you want to start copying 
(so 0 would be start at the beginning of the string), and the second argument is the length of the 
string you want to copy (so Length will copy the entire string). You would then be able to 
manipulate `arr` like any other array.