---
layout: post
category: lab
title: Lab 00 - Temperature Conversion
date: 2013-01-29
---
# Lab 00 - Application of Operators: Temperature Conversion

## Background

Temperature is an indicator of relative ambient heat. Temperature is typically expressed in one of
two common systems, Celsius and Fahrenheit.

### Celsius

This system was invented by Anders Celsius in the 18th Century and is also referred to as 'centigrade'.
0&deg; Celsius is the melting point of water and 100&deg; is the boiling point.

*More Information:* [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Celsius] [1]

### Fahrenheit

Also invented in the 18th Century and named after its inventor (Daniel Gabriel Fahrenheit), this is
the temperature system we typically use in the United States (and a handful of other countries). The
melting point of water in Fahrenheit is 32&deg;.

*More Information:* [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fahrenheit] [2]

### Conversion Between Celsius and Fahrenheit

The formula to convert to Fahrenheit (F) given a temperature in Celsius (C) is:

    F = C * 9/5 + 32

*Bonus Question:* How would you convert from Fahrenheit to Celsius given the above formula?

## Assignment

Using what we learned on Tuesday, January 29th, write a console program that requests a temperature
in Celsius from the user and then outputs the temperature in Fahrenheit.

You should already know everything you need to accomplish this, using the operators we have already
learned.

*Bonus Question:* Should the variables you use for Celsius and Fahrenheit be of type `int` or `double`? Why?

### Getting Input from the User

We did not cover how to get input from the user, initially. However, this is very easy to do and
similar to outputting to the screen.

The key line of code you need is:

    Console.ReadLine()

This tells the system to read what the user types in (until the end of line) and return it. Since
this function returns data of type `String`, we need a `String` to put it in. For example:

    String input;  
    input = Console.ReadLine()

The above code will store whatever the user types in as a _String_. It is important to remember that
we've stored our data as a String because if we want to use it as a different type, we will have to
convert it. Fortunately, C# makes this very easy with the following methods:

    Convert.ToInt32(String);  
    Convert.ToDouble(String);

The above methods do what you would expect. There are more [here] [3].

Therefore, if we wanted to request the user's age and store it as a number (say of type `int`), we
might write something like this:

    int age;  
    String input;  
    Console.WriteLine("Please enter your age: ");  
    input = Console.ReadLine();  
    age = Convert.ToInt32(input);

After this code executes, you would have the user's age stored as an `int` in the variable `age`. You
should do something similar to handle your input.

### Thought Question

What happens if the user doesn't type in a number? What if they put in a word/letter?
    
### Challenge 1: Fahrenheit to Celsius

Can you write a second program thet converts Fahrenheit to Celsius? 

### Challenge 2: GUI-Based Version

Can you write a GUI (WPF) program instead a console program to accomplish this same task? The user
would type in their Celsius temperature into a text box and then press submit to prompt the program
to calculate and display the converted temperature.

Feel free to play around with the WPF controls. I will posts some hints on how to do this over the
next few days. Good luck!

[1]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Celsius "Wikipedia Article on Celsius"
[2]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fahrenheit "Wikipedia Article on Fahrenheit"
[3]: http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/bb397679.aspx "C# String Conversion Methods"