---
layout: post
category: lesson
title: Lesson 04 - Arrays and File I/O
date: 2013-02-26
---
# Lesson 04 - Arrays and File I/O

## Arrays

Thus far we have learned how to create variables of various data types that hold a single piece of 
date. For example, `int number = 7` creates a variables of type `int` named _number_ that holds the 
value _7_ in it. 

Arrays allow us to store multiple pieces of data within a single variable in a variety of ways. For 
example, if we wanted a list of of numbers, we could create one as such:

    int[] numbers = {7, 25, 32};

The `int[]` keyword indicates that the variable we are declaring is an __array__. The comma-separated 
list of values in curly braces are the contents of the array. The declaration above would create an 
array of size 3 (since we have 3 values) and populate it with 7, 25 and 32. The individual pieces of 
data in an array are called __elements__ of that array. So the first __element__ of _numbers_ is the 
`int` value of 7.

### Accessing Array Values

Creating an array and populating it with data is all well and good, but how do we retrieve that data? 
You can think of data in an array as being stored in separate discrete 'bins'. For example, in the 
array _numbers_ above, we have 3 'bins' with the number 7 stored in the first bin, 25 in the second 
bin and 32 in the third bin. We then use those 'bin' numbers (a 'bin' is actually called an __index__) 
to access the data stored in them. 

__NOTE:__ A very important consideration is that arrays in C# (and most programming languages) are 
__zero-indexed__. What that means is that the first index is not index 1 but index 0. An array of size 
6 would be indexed 0 through 5, not 1 through 6. This can be confusing at first but is something you 
will get used to as a computer programmer.

To access data in the _numbers_ array then we just refer to the appropriate index.

    Console.WriteLine(numbers[0]);  // prints the number 7.
    Console.WriteLine(numbers[2]);  // prints the number 32.

### Another Way to Create Arrays

Another way to create an array is to simply declare an empty array of fixed size and then populate 
it with data index-by-index (you may not have all your data at once or may be adding data while the 
program runs). For example:

    int[] numbers;          // Declares numbers as an array of type int.
    numbers = new int[3];   // Creates an array of size 3 that is initially empty.
    numbers[0] = 7;         // Store the value 7 in index 0 of numbers.
    numbers[2] = 32;        // Stores the value 32 in index 2 of numbers.
    numbers[1] = 25;        // Stores the value 25 in index 1 of numbers.

Note that above I didn't have to populate the indices in order.

Something to keep in mind is that you can't resize arrays. If you make an array of size 3, you can't 
add a fourth element. You would have to create a new array of size 4, transfer the elements from the 
old array to the new array, delete the old array and then set the value of the new fourth element. 
That probably sounds like a lot of work. Fortunately, when we get into Object-Oriented Programming 
(very soon) we will learn about different __container__ classes (basically fancy arrays) that will 
handle dynamic resizing and such for us.

#### Getting the Size of an Array

There are tons of things you can do with arrays. One, that is very useful, is get the number of elements 
in an array. For example:

    Console.WriteLine(numbers.length);  // Would print 3, since numbers is of size 3.

The `length` member is the number of elements in an array and you may find yourself using that.

### Foreach: Iterating Through an Array      

Last lesson we learned about iteration loops `while, for, do...while`. C# has a handy way to iterate 
through an array that allows you to run some code on every element of an array. To do that, we use 
the `foreach` loop. An example:

    // The following code prints every element in numbers.
    foreach (int number in numbers) {
        Console.WriteLine(number);
    }

Basically, you declare a placeholder variable (in this case `number`) for each element in your array 
and then can run code on it. Let's say you only wanted to print the elements that were larger than 
10 in your array, then your code would be: 

    foreach (int numbers in numbers) {
        if (number > 10) {
            Console.WriteLine(number);
        }
    }

The `foreach` construct is really useful.

### Lab 06 - Calculating an Average

At this time, complete [Lab 06][1].

### Lab 07 - Palindromes

At this time, complete [Lab 07][2].

### Multi-Dimensional Arrays

So far, the arrays we have looked at have been single-dimensional, basically like lists. C# supports 
multi-dimensional arrays as well. You can think of a two-dimensional array as a table (with rows and 
columns), a three-dimensional array as a cube (with a length, width, and height) where every element 
is a point in that cube and I have no idea how to think about arrays with more than three dimensions. 
Typically, people don't work with arrays beyond 3 dimensions because human beings have trouble 
thinking about things in more than 3D. We're really only going to cover two-dimensional arrays.

Creating a two-dimensional array is simple:

    // The code below creates a 2D array table with 2 rows and 3 columns.
    int[,] table;
    table = new int[2, 3];

Accessing elements in a 2D array now requires an extra index because you have to specify what row 
__and__ what column the element you want is in. So to access the element in the second row and third 
column we would write `table[1,2]`. 

You can still use `foreach` on an array but you may find you have more control by using nested `for` 
loops and iterating row by row and then column by column. For example:

    for (int rowIndex = 0, rowIndex < numbers.getLength(0); ++RowIndex) {
        for (int colIndex = 0, colIndex < numbers.getLength(1); ++ColIndex) {
            Console.WriteLine(numbers[rowIndex,colIndex]);
        }
    }

The `getLength()` method gets the size of a particular array dimension so `getLength(0)` returns the 
number of rows and `getLength(1)` returns the number of columns. In the code above, your first `for` 
loop iterates through each row and then your inner `for` loop iterates through each column. It then 
prints each element in the array.

## Interlude - File I/O

Before continuing on with multi-dimensional arrays and such, we're going to learn briefly about 
interacting with files and how to read in data from a file. This will be related to arrays 
and we'll use it in our array practice labs.

This is going to be very brief, for a more in-depth look at file I/O for C#, check out this MSDN 
[article][3].

### Basic File Interaction: Open/Close

For our purposes, we will be opening and reading text files. Before you can do anything with File I/O 
you have to include a line at the top of your program (where you declare what namespaces you're using):

    using System.IO;

Then, to open a file for reading, you create a new `StreamReader` object as such:

    Streamreader reader = File.OpenText(<filename>);

Here, <filename> is the name of your file. For now, our files have to be *.txt files and have to go 
in the /bin/debug folder of our projects. I'll show you where that is.

When we're done with a file, it's important to close it so that it's not occupying precious memory. 
We do this with the following statement:

    reader.Close();

### Reading from a File

In order to read from a file, we need to have it open and then just call a specific method, which 
will read an entire line in a file and return it to us as a string.

    reader.ReadLine();

Pretty easy, but remember that this returns a string so you may have to convert it if you need a 
different type.

## Lab 08 - Magic Squares

At this time, complete [Lab 08][4].

[1]: {% post_url 2013-02-26-lab6 %} "Lab 06 - Calculating an Average"
[2]: {% post_url 2013-03-10-lab7 %} "Lab 07 - Palindromes"
[3]: http://support.microsoft.com/kb/304430 "How to do basic file I/O in Visual C#"
[4]: {% post_url 2013-03-10-lab8 %} "Lab 08 - Magic Squares"
