---
layout: post
category: lesson
title: Lesson 03 - Methods
date: 2013-02-26
---
# Lesson 04 - Methods

Thus far, all the code we have written has gone into a single method called `Main()`. This is all 
well and good for small programs but as you begin writing more complex software, having all of your 
code sitting in one giant block will be both unreadable and impractical. Instead, we will learn 
how to write our own methods and then invoke them as needed throughout out program. 

## DRY Principle

__D__on't __R__epeat __Y__ourself is a very important principle of software engineering. At its core 
is the idea that any piece of information in your software should exist in one and _only_ one place.

Why?

Well, let's say you write some block of code that converts Celsius temperatures into Fahrenheit. Then, 
you decide to re-use it somewhere else in your program so you just copy/paste it. Awesome, right? But 
then what happens if you decide you want to modify that block of code? You now have to modify it in 
both places.

Instead, you could write that block of code as a method and then __call__ the method in two different 
places in your program. Then, if you decide to modify the method, you only have to change it in one 
place.

## Defining a Method

Before you can use a method, you have to define it. 

    <data type> <Method Name>(<arguments>) {
        // Code that method runs.
    }

All methods need to have a data type, which are the same types we've already discussed. There is an 
additional type we haven't covered called `void` which is not really a type at all. Methods of type 
`void` basically just _do_ something but don't return any data.

Method names follow the same naming conventions as variable names.

Arguments are the inputs you feed into a method and are comma-separated. For example, a method that 
doubles a number might look like this:

    double doubleNumber(double x) {
        return 2 * x;
    }

The `return` keyword is what the method actually passes back to the program when it is called. As 
noted above, `void` methods don't pass anything back so they don't have a `return` statement, but 
every other method type does. In the above example, `x` is the argument of the method `doubleNumber`
and it must be of type `double`. Furthermore, the data that the method returns is also of type 
`double`. A `void` version of this method might look like this:

    void printDouble(double x) {
        Console.WriteLine(2 * x);
    }

As you can see, there is no `return` statement. This should make more sense when we look at how 
methods are used.

## Calling a Method

Once a method is defined, we can call it anywhere in our program. For example:

    double number = 6;
    number = doubleNumber(number);  // Sets the value of number to 12.

All we do is write the name of the method with appropriate arguments. The definition of the method 
gives us a __prototype__ that tells us that `doubleNumber` should have one argument of type `double` 
so calling it as `doubleNumber(number)` is a valid call.

Note that this would _not_ work:

    double number = 6;
    number = printDouble(number);

Why not? Because you can't assign a variable the value of a `void` method. `void` methods have no 
value, they don't return anything. Instead:

    double number = 6;
    printDouble(number);

## Methods and Scope

We talked earlier about the idea of __scope__, that variables only exist within the block they were 
declared in. The same applies for methods. Variables declared inside of a method don't exist outside 
of it and are destroyed after the method runs. Also, the method can't access variables declared 
outside of the method unless there were fed in as arguments.

## Lab 05 - The ATM

At this time, complete [Lab 5][1].

[1]: {% post_url 2013-02-26-lab5 %} "Lab 065- The ATM"