---
layout: post
category: lesson
title: Lesson 01 - Conditional Statements
date: 2013-02-05
---
# Lesson 01 - Conditional Statements

So far we have learned how to execute code _procedurally_ from top to bottom. When the program is 
executed, we execute statement 1, then 2, then 3, etc. However, sometime we want to execute a line 
of code only if a certain condition is met or we may have different actions we want to take 
based on the outcome of one or more conditional tests.

Today we will learn about different conditional structures available to us and how to use them and 
in what scenarios.

## If...else

The most basic conditional structure is the `if...else` block. It basically says, 'if condition is 
true, do thing A, otherwise do thing B'. For example, consider the following block of code:

    String input;
    int inputInt;
    Console.WriteLine('Please enter a number: ');
    input = Console.ReadLine();
    inputInt = Convert.ToInt32(input);
    if (input > 5) 
    {
        Console.WriteLine('Your input is greater than 5.');
    } 
    else
    {
        Console.WriteLine('Your input is not greater than 5.');
    }
    
What does this code do? 

### Formatting if...else Statements

In order to ensure readability, it's very important to format your blocks properly. Lines of code 
surrounded by curly braces `{...}` are called _blocks_ and we keep our code clean by using proper 
indentation. A few rules.

1. Always enclose `if` and `else` blocks in curly braces. You technically don't have to do this for 
one-line statements but it's still good practice to do so and makes your code less error-prone if
you decide to add to the code block later.
2. Code blocks should be indented in from the `if` or `else` as shown above. An indent is a tab or 
3 to 4 spaces. Spaces are preferred to tabs because tab width may vary between machines/applications. 
You can configure your IDE to interpret tabs as spaces, which I'll show you how to do.
3. If you nest `if...else` statements, then the nested statements should be indented in further. 
The idea is that at a glance you should be able to tell different code blocks apart. That said, if 
you have blocks nested more than 2 or 3 deep, your code will be hard to read and you should try to 
find a better way to accomplish your task.

## If...else if...else

A variation of the `if...else` statement allows for multiple conditions to be checked for. Consider 
this modified excerpt from the code above:

    if (input > 10)
    {
        Console.WriteLine('Your input is greater than 10.');
    }
    else if (input > 5) 
    {
        Console.WriteLine('Your input is greater than 5.');
    } 
    else
    {
        Console.WriteLine('Your input is less than or equal to 5.');
    }
    
The order of your conditions matters, the first condition that is met will execute its corresponding 
code block. For example:

    if (input > 5) 
    {
        Console.WriteLine('Your input is greater than 5.');
    } 
    else if (input > 10)
    {
        Console.WriteLine('Your input is greater than 10.');
    }    
    else
    {
        Console.WriteLine('Your input is less than or equal to 5.');
    }

What would this program output given an input of '11'?

## Conditions and Relational Operators 

The statement between the parentheses of a `if()` or `else if()` is the condition whose value you are 
checking. Conditions must evaluate as booleans and return either `true` or `false`. You can therefore 
use any boolean variables you have defined as a condition or make use of a relational operator.

### Relational Operators

Last week we learned about arithmetic operators. These allowed us to do things like add, subtract, 
multiply, etc. Relational operators allow us to compare two values and eveluate to either `true` or
`false` depending on what we are comparing. These are the operators:

* '>': The greater than operator. `a > b` evaluates to true if a is greater than b.
* '<': The less than operator. Works as above.
* '>=': The greater than or equal operator. `a >= b` evaluates to true if a is greater than or equal 
to b.
* `<=': The less than or equal operator. Works as above.
* '==': The equality operator. `a == b` evaluates to true if a is equal to b.
* '!=': The inequality operator. `a != b` evaluates to true if a is not equal to b.      

_EXTREMELY IMPORTANT:_  `==` and `=` are note the same thing! `=` is the _assignment_ operator. `a 
= b` assigns the value of a to b. It does not compare them. If you use `a = b` as a condition in `if` 
statements, you will be a very unhappy programmer. 

### Logical Operators

There are also logical operators. These allow us to create complex conditions. For example, if we 
wanted to check whether a was both greater than 10 and less than 15, we would write:

    if ( a > 10 && a < 15)
    
The `&&` or AND operator makes it so that both conditions `a > 10` and `a < 15` have to be true for 
the entire condition to evaluate as true. 

Similarly, if we wanted to know whether a string was equal 
to red or blue, we would write:

    if (string == 'red' || or string == 'blue')
    
The `||` or OR operator makes it so that if either condition is true, the whole condition is true.

The last logical operator we often us is the negation or NOT operator `!`. Basically, it makes a `true` 
condition evaluate as `false` and vice versa. So if we had a `bool` variable 'hungry' and we wanted 
code to execute only if we weren't hungry, we would write:

    if (!hungry) {
        // Code here.
    }
    
The code in the `if` block will only execute if 'hungry' is set to false.
    
## Lab 01 - Hurricane Categories

At this time, complete [Lab 01] [1].

## Switch

The last conditional structure we will look at is the `switch` statement. The `switch` statement allows
us to select from a discrete number of cases and execute the appropriate code. For example:

    switch (day)
    {
        case 0 :
            dayName = "Sunday";
            break;
        case 1 :
            dayName = "Monday";
            break;
        case 2 :
            dayName = "Tuesday";
            break;
        ...
        default :
            dayName = "Unknown";
            break;
    }
    
Some notes:

- The condition inside the parentheses of `switch()` must be a primitive data type such as `int` or 
`string`. For anything else, you have to use `if...else if` statements.
- Each `case` must be different and must be a number or character/string. You also have to include a
 `break;` at the end of each case, as shown above.
- You must have a `default` case that runs if none of the other cases apply. It too must end with a 
`break` statement.

You can actually group cases together, but there must not be any statements between them. An example:

    switch (suit)
    {
        case "hearts":
        case "diamonds":
            color = "Red";
            break;
        case "clubs":
        case "spades":
            color = "Black";
            break;
        default:
            color = "None";
            break;
    }
    
In the code above, both hearts and diamonds are set to red, and similarly for clubs and spades.

## Lab

At this time, complete [Lab 02] [2].

## Homework 00 - Quadratic Equation Calculator

At this time, complete [Homework 00][3].
    
[1]: {% post_url 2013-02-05-lab1 %} "Lab 01 - Hurricane Categories"
[2]: {% post_url 2013-02-05-lab2 %} "Lab 02 - Distance to Earth"
[3]: {% post_url 2013-01-29-homework0 %} "Homework 00 - Quadratic Equation Calculator"