---
layout: post
category: lesson
title: Lesson 05 - Exception Handling
date: 2013-04-09
---
# Lesson 05 - Exception Handling

Load up your Temperature Conversion program and run it. Instead of providing a number when prompted, 
instead type in a character string (i.e. 'bacon'). What happens?

How do we handle errors in our programs? In the past, programmers used `if` or `switch` statements 
an attempt to exhaustively cover every possible error; however, this is error-prone and hard to 
read. Today, modern programming languages offer a powerful tool for error-handling called 
__exceptions__.

The error you saw in your Temperature Conversion program is an example of an __exception__. 
Specifically, this was an example of a `FormatException`. The `Convert.ToInt32` method _throws_ 
this exception when you pass it an argument that isn't a number of some sort. An __exception__ is an 
unexpected or anomolous event in the execution of your program that requires special processing. It 
may be an error, or bug, or it may be something else (i.e. bad user input, problem with environment, 
etc.). 

Languages like C# provide features to _handle_ __exceptions__. The control flow looks like this:

1. Try to do something.
2. Catch any exceptions that result.
3. Handle those exceptions gracefully. 

Here is an example using `Convert.ToInt32`.

    try {
        Console.WriteLine("Please input a number: ");
        number = Convert.ToInt32(Console.ReadLine());
    }  catch (FormatException e) {
        Console.WriteLine("Your input was not a number. Please try again.");
    }

As you can see, we've wrapped our code in a `try...catch` block. The program _tries_ to execute the 
statements in the `try` block and if any of those statements throw an exception (or if you throw 
one yourself), the `catch` block kicks in. Note that the argument for the `catch` block is the type 
of exception you want to handle followed by a name (typically `e`) you assign.

## Multiple Catch Blocks

You can have as many `catch` blocks as you want as long as they all catch a different type of 
exception. For example, the `Convert.ToInt32` method also throws an `OverflowException` if the 
number you input is too large. Her is our code with a second `catch` block.

    try {
        Console.WriteLine("Please input a number: ");
        number = Convert.ToInt32(Console.ReadLine());
    } catch (FormatException e) {
        Console.WriteLine("Your input was not a number. Please try again.");
    } catch (OverflowException e) {
        Console.WriteLine("Your input was too large. Please try again with a smaller number.");
    } catch (Exception e) {
        Console.WriteLine("An unspecified error occured. Please fire the programmer.");
        error_log("Exception thrown by {0}.\nException Message: {1}\nStack Trace: {2}", e.Source, 
            e.Message, e.StackTrace)
    } 

The code now catches the `OverflowException` and give the user an appropriate message. 

## The Catch-All Exception

You'll notice that I included a third `catch` block that just catches `Exception`. This catches _all_ 
exceptions, since every exception is a __child__ of `Exception`. Depending on the situation, you may 
choose not to do this, it's up to you in a lot of cases. I like it because then I can catch even 
exceptions I did not expect. 

## Ordering `catch` Blocks

A very important note is that your program will go through `catch` blocks from top to bottom until 
it finds a `catch` block that matches the exception that was thrown. What this means in practice is 
that you always want to place your most specific exceptions at the top and the most general ones at 
the bottom. Because every single exception counts as an `Exception`, if you put the third `catch` 
block at the top in the above example, you will never reach the more specific messages.

## Handling Exceptions

How do you handle exceptions? As a general rule, your exception handling should convey something 
descriptive to the user, possibly log the error and then either restore normal control flow or exit 
gracefully (operative word being _gracefully_). In the example above, I output a user-friendly 
message for each exception. For the third `catch` block, because it handles anything else I may not 
have accounted for, I log the error (with my fake `error_log` method) so that a programmer can look 
at it later and figure out what went wrong. To accomplish this, I make use of some handy exception 
attributes.

- __Source__: This attribute tells you what method threw the exception.
- __Message__: An exception-specific message. Whether it tells you anything useful will depend on the 
exception itself and who wrote it.
- __StackTrace__: A break down of how the exception was thrown. For example, if the exception was 
thrown by Method C, which was called by Method B, which was called by Method A, it will show the 
entire stack. 

## Using Exceptions

Using exception-handling is a great way to handle errors in your programs or unexpected events. So, 
how do you know when to use exceptions? Do you just wrap all of your code in `try...catch` blocks?

Not exactly. Doing that would slow you program down and may be unnecessary. Instead, use your 
judgement. Use `try...catch` anytime your code has a potential to fail (which shouldn't be always!). 
Some common situations:

- Dealing with User Input (because who knows what a user might do!).
- Dealing with Files (what if a file is already in use, deleted, etc.)
- Dealing with Networks (what if a connection is lost, resource is moved, etc.)

Basically, any time your program depends on something external to itself (whether that's data or 
environmental resources), you'll probably want to institute exception-handling.

## Lab 09 - Exception Handling

At this time, complete [Lab 09][1].

[1]: {% post_url 2013-04-09-lab9 %} "Lab 09 - Exception Handling"
    