---
layout: post
category: lesson
title: Lesson 02 - Iteration Loops
date: 2013-02-12
---
# Lesson 02 - Iteration Loops

Let's quickly review what we have learned so far:

- Primitive Data Types.
- Writing/Reading from Console.
- Arithmetic, Relational and Logical Operators.
- Conditional Structures.

So we know how to write programs to manipulate data and we can do so *conditionally*, which is to 
say that we can write programs that behave differently depending on the state of certain conditions. 

But what if we want our program to perform a repetitive task? One of the great advantages of 
computers is that they don't get bored performing tedious, repetetive tasks. So how do we leverage 
that? The answer is iteration.

## The while... Loop

The first iteration loop we will talk about is the `while...` loop. Consider the following code: 

    1   int i = 0;
    2   while (i < 10) {
    3       Console.WriteLine("This is line {0}.", i);
    4       i++;
    5   }

Let's break it down, line by line.

1. We declare a variable `i` of type `int` and set its value to zero (0).
2. We open our `while` block. The statement in the parentheses, like in an `if` statement, is a 
*conditional* statement that must evaluate to true or false. In this case, we are testing the value 
of `i` and checking whether it is less than ten (10). If the conditional statement is true, then we 
run the code inside the curly braces. *However*, the code inside the `while` loop does not run only 
once; instead, it runs over and over again until the `while` condition on line 2 is no longer true. 
Once the condition is false, the entire block of code inside the curly braces is skipped and the 
program continues to run normally.
3. This part is simple, you know what it does. It prints the statement 'This is line #.' where # is 
the value of `i` (which starts at 0).
4. This is the most important part of the loop! Every time the code inside the loop runs, it 
increments the value of `i` by one (1). After 10 iterations, the value of `i` will be ten (10) and 
the while condition will evaluate to false, causing the loop to terminate.

### Infinite Loops

Why is line 4 so important in the code above? Imagine it was not present. When would the `while` 
loop terminate?

The answer is *never*. 

Every iterative loop needs a **termination condition**, something that causes it to end. Without it, 
you end up with infinite loops, which run forever and will crash computers and make users (and 
programmers) unhappy. 

Every single time you write an iterative loop, make sure it will eventually terminate. 

### Loop Invariant

Even better than just knowing a loop will terminate (someday?) is figuring out what is called a **loop 
invariant** to show what a loop is doing and prove that it will terminate. Let's look at our code 
again.

    // This loop prints 'This is line #.' Where # is the value if i
    // from 0 to 10.
    //
    // Loop Invariant: At the start of each iteration, we have printed i
    // lines.
    1   int i = 0;
    2   while (i < 10) {
    3       Console.WriteLine("This is line {0}.", i);
    4       i++;
    5   }

According to our comment, this `while` loop prints ten (10) lines to the console. Our 
**loop invariant** is supposed to prove that. The way we do that is examining the loop invariant and 
showing it holds at three stages in the loop:

- **Initiation:** Before the first iteration starts.
- **Maintenance:** From one iteration to the next.
- **Termination**: Once the loop ends.

We'll examine these individually for the code above.

#### Initiation

What we need to prove here is that at the start of the first iteration, our loop invariant is true. 
This is typically fairly simple to prove. In our case, before the first iteration, our loop 
invariant says 'We have printed 0 lines.' This is certainly true, before the loop starts, we haven't 
printed any lines inside the block, so our invariant holds.

#### Maintenance

This is usually the trickiest part of loop invariants. What we need to show here is that if the 
loop invariant holds for an iteration (iteration *k* for example), then it also holds for the next 
iteration (iteration *k+1*). So, let's examine our code:

1. At the start of iteration *k*, we have printed *k* lines. Assuming `k < 10` then the `while` loop 
runs.
2. Line 3 prints a line to console. We have now printed *k+1* lines.
3. Line 4 increments `i` from *k* to *k+1* and the iteration ends.
4. At the start of the next iteration, *k+1*, we have printed *k+1* lines and so our loop invariant 
holds.

#### Termination

Here we show that:

- The loop terminates at some point.
- Something interesting happened.

Once again, we examine our code:

1. Because line 4 increments `i` with each iteration, `i` will eventually reach ten (10). When that 
happens, the `while` condition will no longer be true and the loop will terminate.
2. Our Loop Invariant tells us that at the end of our last iteration (when `i == 10`), we will have 
printed 10 lines. As it turns out, that was exactly what we wanted to do, so that counts as 
something interesting!

#### Why Are We Doing This?

Loop invariants are an important tool in ensuring that our loops do what we want/expect them to do. 
Do we need to go through the above process for *every single* loop we write? Probably not. Simple 
loops like the one above don't really need to be proven correct; however, we will sometimes write 
much more complex loops and in those cases it may be helpful/important to prove our loops correct.

This is kind of an advanced concept that most students wouldn't learn until later in their 
education. I think it's a really important concept though, worth understanding early because it *will*
make you a better programmer and computer scientist. That said, if there's something you don't 
understand or need clarified, go back over these notes or ask me! I am always available through e-mail 
and I'm more than happy to answer your questions or provide additional practice.

## The for... Loop

Back to loops. The `for` loop is my favorite. Functionally, it is not that different from a `while` 
loop, but it's more compact and so I like it more. Your mileage may vary. Here's our previous block 
of code as a `for` loop.

    // This loop prints 'This is line #.' Where # is the value if i
    // from 0 to 10.
    //
    // Loop Invariant: At the start of each iteration, we have printed i
    // lines.
    for (int i = 0; i < 10, i++) {
        Console.WriteLine("This is line {0}.", i);
    }

Looks pretty familiar, right? Basically, we turned the three lines of our `while` loop into a single 
line. Let's dissect the `for` statement.

The `for` statement follows this format: `for (init; cond; loop)`.

1. **init:** This statement is executed once, before the first iteration of your loop. In a `while` 
loop this is placed outside of the loop, above the `while` statement.
2. **cond:** This is our conditional expression that is evaluated at the start of each iteration, 
just like for a `while` loop.
3. **loop:** This statement is executed at the end of each iteration.

The advantage of the `for` loop, aside from being more compact than `while` loop is that it makes it 
very clear what the loop is iterating on and how it updates the loop variable.

## Lab 03 - Sum of Numbers

At this time, complete [Lab 03][1].

## The do...while Loop

The last type of loop we will learn about today (we will learn a fourth one next week when we cover 
arrays) is the `do...while` loop. Here is an example:

    int i = 0;
    do {
        Console.WriteLine(i);
        i++;
    } while (i < 10);

This works not unlike a regular `while` loop with one key difference, the loop always runs _at least_ 
once. After it runs, it checks if the `while` condition is true and then decides whether to run the 
loop again. 

## Lab 04 - Do...While

At this time, complete [Lab 04][2].

[1]: {% post_url 2013-02-12-lab3 %} "Lab 03 - Sum of Numbers"
[2]: {% post_url 2013-02-12-lab4 %} "Lab 04 - Do...While"


